We will implement a distributed key-value store in Rust based on a select set of features from the Amazon Dynamo paper. Specifically, we want to focus on implementing the write availability and eventual consistency guarantees of the paper. We will specifically focus on implementing a consistent hash ring, replication, sloppy quorum with hinted handoff, and gossip between nodes.

This is an intentionally simplified design compared to the actual system implemented in Dynamo. In the paper, every write is time stamped with a vector clock and on read, if a causal ordering does not exist for the different writes on each replication copy, they are all returned to the client and it is up to the client to resolve the conflicts. As a simplification, we simply generate physical timestamps for every write and take the write with the latest timestamp. The paper also implements a background repair task using Merkle trees for longer-term divergence between nodes. While this is interesting to us, and we may attempt an implementation if time permits, we do not expect to implement this in our system. Dynamo features any-node request routing. For our system, we will expose a static set of seed nodes for clients to contact, which are also used for bootstrapping new nodes’ gossip tables. Seed nodes will act as the coordinators for the operations they are servicing. We will also assume there is at least 1 seed node active at all times. Dynamo also implements multiple different strategies for distributing virtual nodes in a hash ring. We will simply distribute them randomly.

For the consistent hash ring, we will use hash_ring crate (which also has a function for computing preference lists). If time permits we will try to replace this with our own implementation. Replication/sloppy quorum simply means forwarding W write requests or R read requests to the other replication copies during the respective request and performing repairs on read. We have done something similar in our lab 3 implementation, though we acknowledge this will likely be a much more complex implementation. We will be implementing hinted handoffs on our own. We will also be implementing node migrations/reconciliation in the event of total failures (node dies and loses its data) and/or node joins/leaves on our own. For gossip, we will use memberlist which has native support for seed nodes. If time permits we will try to replace this with our own implementation. Finally, similar to how the labs are structured, we will use rocksDB as a prebuilt storage engine, which we will not attempt to replace even if time permits. Dynamo only exposes a get and put operation, so we will do the same using only HTTP.

For evaluation, our main focus is on maintaining write availability during node failures. We will measure:

    Baseline performance in a healthy cluster

    Write success rate under failure, ie killing one node when W=2, N=3 and performing writes

    Recovery speed, bringing the dead node back (data still intact) and measuring how long it takes for hints to propagate and the replica comes back up to speed

    Latency and write success rate while varying R/W parameters